You're watching Northern Crimes. Salem, Oregon, January 17th, 1989. It's a Tuesday evening, 6:45 p.m. The state capital complex is emptying out. Cars pull away. Office lights click off one by one. The winter dark comes early here and by the time Michael Frankie steps out of the dome building, the parking lot is quiet. Frankie is the director of the Oregon Department of Corrections. A lawyer and a former judge, he spent his career inside the system. And lately, he's been finding out just how rotten it really is. Frankie walks toward his vehicle, but he'll never drive away. At 7:25 p.m., a colleague finds his car in its designated spot, the driver's side door standing open, but Michael is nowhere to be found. She notifies building security. A little over an hour later, two senior officials return to search the building themselves. They comb it top to bottom and find nothing. By around 9:30, they give up and go home, assuming their boss had simply gone to dinner. No one calls the police. It isn't until 12:40 a.m. that a security guard finally discovers Michael Frankie's body on the north portico of the same building he just left. He's collapsed on the steps, suffering blunt force trauma to his face, defensive stab wounds to his left arm, and a fatal stab wound to his heart. His wallet is still in his pocket, his expensive watch still on his wrist. But the briefcase, the one containing sensitive information on floppy discs, well, it's gone. Oregon officials will call it a random robbery, but the facts, when investigated [clears throat] deeper, suggest a much darker story. This is Northern Crimes. [music] [music] [music] Michael Frankie came to Oregon with a reputation that preceded him. in New Mexico. He'd served as a senior assistant attorney general, and investigated the 1980 state penitentiary riot, the bloodiest prison uprising in American history. He'd gone on to serve as Secretary of the New Mexico Corrections Department under Governor Tony Annayia. By the time Oregon Governor Neil Goldmid appointed him director of the state's Department of Corrections in 1987, Frankie was considered one of the more sophisticated minds in American corrections. His approach was described as innovative, focused on education and rehabilitation, treating inmates more as people, not just a problem to manage. Now, the Oregon DOC he inherited, well, it was a different kind of institution altogether. The system was overcrowded and it was riddled with corruption. And beneath the administrative surface, it had developed what witnesses would later describe as a good old boy culture that had been running and protecting itself for a very long time. If that wasn't enough, drugs were moving into Oregon's prisons using official state vehicles. The vehicles had custom hidden compartments. Staff members were routinely smuggling contraband right through the front doors inside their own lunch buckets, taking advantage of a system where employees weren't subjected to searches. Even more brazenly, under the guise of overcrowding, corrupt prison guards were letting inmates out for weeks at a time to commit burglaries, stashing stolen goods at protected safe houses before returning to their cells loaded with drugs. But the rot went even deeper. A powerful prison lawyer assigned to the department, Assistant Attorney General Scott Mallister reportedly wielded his own unilateral power to pull inmates out of maximum security at his leisure. And this provided a foolproof alibi for prisoners on the outside who were rumored to be running his personal errands. Now, the interesting thing is there was actually someone who'd already tried to expose all of this. In 1986, state senator LB Day had received the same reports from the same guards and inmates, and he actually pushed for a real investigation. Instead, the state handed him a cover up meant to look like accountability. Six low-ranking guards demoted or fired, while the wholesale theft, the smuggling, the good old boy culture remained intact. Nothing really changed. And to make matters worse, two weeks after writing the governor an angry letter about the whitewash, well, Day died of a heart attack. At first, it seemed like the investigation he'd started died with him. That is until Michael Frankie arrived. The same guards who'd once gone to Senator Day started finding their way to Michael Frankie. And the people running the drug rings inside the prison knew exactly what that meant. In the months before his death, people close to Michael Frankie started to notice some changes. He began sleeping with a 45 caliber pistol under his pillow. He kept a 12- gauge riot gun by his door. He was practicing. Hundreds of spent shell casings would later be found scattered at his home. Days earlier, he'd told his sister-in-law, Katie, that he'd uncovered something far bigger than he expected. He told his brother Kevin that he was about to do a thorough house cleaning, that he was preparing to fire or demote some of his top aids, high-ranking officials who'd been entrenched in that system for more than a decade. >> I believe that Mike was setting about as he told me that he was going to do a general house cleaning, overall house cleaning. Uh, one of the individuals that he didn't name by name, but stated as his deputy was going to go and several other key people in the organization. And remember, Michael was a lawyer and a former judge. He understood the importance of evidence. He understood the importance of process. And he clearly understood that what he'd found was dangerous enough to warrant loading his weapons at night. Whatever he knew, he was about to make it official. And that brings us back to January 17th, 1989. That evening, Michael Frankie was preparing for something big. The next morning, Wednesday, January 18th, he was set to deliver an explosive briefing to a joint legislative committee chaired by state senator Jim Hill, a reformer who revived the prison corruption probe after Senator LB Day died. And think about this, he wasn't headed to the capital for some routine budget request. He was planning to dismantle a criminal network. That afternoon, Frankie sat down with his assistant director, Elise Clawson, to run a dress rehearsal. They practiced their arguments and coordinated their strategy. Clawson would testify in the House, Frankie in the Senate. She'd later recall that despite demanding pressure, he seemed stoic and intensely focused. By early evening, he was alone at his desk, mapping out his thoughts. He wrote a list of talking points on his office whiteboard, a list investigators would photograph just hours later after his body was found. At the very bottom of that whiteboard, there was one last thing on the list. A shed. Now, for context, the ashed was a warehouse on prison property that had mysteriously burned to the ground. State officials had swept it under the rug, but Frankie's investigation had found the truth. a brazen arson for insurance scheme that had cost Oregon taxpayers well over a million dollars. It was his smoking gun, undeniable proof of the organized criminal element inside his own department. At 6:45 p.m., Frankie finalized his notes, turned off his office lights, and stepped out into the winter chill. But he'd never get the chance to deliver the speech. Shortly after leaving his desk, Michael Frankie was ambushed in the dark parking lot. By the time his body was discovered just after midnight, the state of Oregon was already writing a very different script. The official theory, the one the state would put forward and ultimately prosecute, was that Michael Frankie interrupted a car break-in in progress, a random act of opportunistic crime that had nothing to do with his investigation, his whiteboard, [music] or the people he was about to expose. But there were immediate reasons to be skeptical. His wallet, money, and watch were all still on his body. The only thing missing was his briefcase. Specifically, the briefcase that reportedly contains sensitive information on floppy discs. And that wasn't all. The Saturday after the murder, a witness reported seeing 23 bags of shredded computer printouts being removed from the dome building. Why would a state employee be doing that on a Saturday? And then there's this. At 10:15 that night, a witness reported five or six men running toward a Volkswagen van near the scene. Who they were and what they had to do with any of it has never been explained. And [music] yet, the investigation into Frankie's death moved quickly. Some might say too quickly. An employee inside the dome building reported seeing a man in a dark pinstriped suit at 6:30 p.m. on the night of the murder. This was after regular business hours in a building that had been locked to the public for an hour. At the time, it was a significant lead. A man in professional dress present at the scene and completely unaccounted for. State police were reportedly reluctant to release the sketch of this mystery man. In fact, District Attorney Dale Penn actively blocked its release to the public. One of his excuses claimed the drawing simply wasn't very good and that it was so generic it quote looked like a lot of people. But a staff columnist for the Oregonian, a reporter named Phil Stanford knew better. Frustrated by the official stonewalling, Stanford bypassed the police entirely and reached out to Michael Frankie's widow. Turns out she had a copy of the sketch. And with just 30 minutes left before Stanford's strict 11:30 a.m. newspaper deadline, she faxed it directly to his desk. Now, because of the limitations of 1989 fax technology, the image that printed in Stanford's column next to his story, it wasn't very good. It was a washed out, grainy copy, hard to really identify anyone. Yet, the grainy leak did exactly what it was meant to do. It embarrassed the authorities and forced their hand. Under mounting public pressure, the state police could no longer hide the drawing. So to save face, they officially released the pristine original sketch to the local media. And when they did, the public saw that DA Dale Penn's excuses hadn't been accurate. The drawing wasn't poor quality. In fact, it was exquisite. Drawn by Gianne Boland, one of the top police artists in the country. And it didn't look like a lot of people. In fact, it looked remarkably similar to a prominent violent meth dealer entrenched in Salem's drug underworld. His name was Timothy Rooster Natividad. So, at this point, you might be thinking, "Case closed." But there was a catch. By the time that pristine sketch was finally broadcast on the evening news, well, Tim Natividad, he was already dead. Just two weeks after Michael Frankie's murder, Rooers's escalating drugfueled violence had finally pushed his girlfriend, Liz Godlo, to a breaking point. In a terrifying domestic dispute where he threatened to murder her and her family, Liz grabbed a gun and shot Natividad to death. She would spend 3 months in jail before a jury finally acquitted her on the grounds of self-defense. And so when that highquality sketch eventually flashed on the local evening news months later, well, Liz and her sister Karen stared at the TV screen in disbelief. The likeness was so undeniable that Liz went straight to the police, telling them that her late knife wielding boyfriend matched the sketch perfectly. And there was more. He'd actually bragged to her about killing a man. But instead of taking it seriously, the police reportedly laughed at her, telling her, quote, "They couldn't convict a dead man. Instead, they appeared to try and control the narrative." They put out a story claiming the man in the pinstripe suit was just a Xerox copier salesman working late. But Phil Stanford, the Oregonian reporter, tracked that salesman down. He had wiry, bright red hair and had been wearing a tweed coat. Nothing like the man in the pinstriped suit. The state seemed desperate to keep anyone from saying Timothy Natividad's name because Natividad's name led directly to another important figure in this story who we've already mentioned, Scott Mallister. Mallister also represented the state's parole board. And sensing the walls closing in, he'd resigned effective January 9th, just 8 days before the murder, and quickly slipped out of Oregon to become the inspector general of Utah's correction department. 6 months later, inmate Conrad Nick Garcia told his prison counselor that Natividad had approached him about killing Frankie and that Mallister had arranged the hit. a woman who was a child at the time would later recall Natividad arriving at her family's home in government vehicles alongside a man she believed was Mallister. Then in 1990, Mallister's own secretary and girlfriend, Linda Parker, gave a sworn statement. She revealed that months after the murder at a party in Utah, she overheard an angry Mallister complaining to his colleagues that the hit had been completely botched, that it was supposed to look like a [snorts] No Charges were ever filed. And when detectives finally had the chance to press Garcia on what he knew, the lead investigator reportedly showed no interest in the name Mallister at all. Then there was a guy named Johnny Krauss. 3 months after the murder, Krauss confessed to the crime. Now, that alone should have been notable. But what made his confession impossible to dismiss was the detail. He described a struggle where he stabbed Frankie through the arm. It was a defensive wound, a closely guarded secret that had never been released to the public. Krauss basically knew a detail he shouldn't have been able to know. But there was more. During a police car ride to show investigators where he discarded his bloody clothes, Krauss pointed out the window at 942 Park Avenue, a house just two blocks from the dome building, and told DA Dale Penn, "If you want to go see where the knife was that killed Mike Frankie, go over there." >> But for reasons unknown, Penn and the state police never searched that house. Krauss went on to tell prosecutors that two corrections officials had actually approached him and offered him $10,000 to kill Michael Frankie, but that he'd backed out at the last second. But again, the state just didn't seem to want to hear it. Investigating Krauss meant investigating the prison systems top brass. So, the DA's office gave him immunity on one specific revealing condition. He couldn't ever confess again. He had to keep denying he'd done it permanently. The man who knew about the secret defensive wound, the man who pointed police toward the murder weapon, was given immunity and told to stay quiet. The only question is why? In April 1990, 15 months after the murder, the state of Oregon made an announcement. They'd indicted a man named Frank Gable. Gable was 29 years old. He was a small-time meth dealer with no obvious connection to Michael Frankie, no known motive for killing the director of corrections, and no physical evidence linking him to the dome building parking lot on the night of January 17th. No DNA, no fibers, no hair, no blood. The state's case was built entirely on testimony, specifically on the testimony of what the defense would later describe as quote jailbirds and excons. These were people who had everything to gain from cooperating with prosecutors and who'd been subjected to extraordinary pressure to make their stories align with what investigators needed. For example, there was Jodie Swearington who was their star witness. She was subjected to 23 polygraph tests. Yeah, you heard that right, 23. [music] And it's worth pausing on that number. A polygraph isn't a truth machine. It's actually a stress machine, one that measures anxiety rather than deception. Investigators used it as basically a psychological tool. They ran her through them over and over and over until her account matched the state's narrative. They even let Jod and her boyfriend, fellow star witness Shorty Harden, sit privately in a room together during the grand jury proceedings so they could coordinate their stories. Later, Jod would try to flee town, eventually recanting her false statements before the trial began, taking the stand for the defense to say she'd been coerced. But the prosecution ruthlessly cross-examined her, weaponizing the very grand jury testimony they'd forced out of her to confuse the jury and destroy her credibility. Then [music] there was Wayne Hunaker. Huner was a maintenance man working near the north end of the dome building, leaving work around 700 p.m. when he heard it. A grunt low and pained like someone getting punched in the gut. He turned toward the sound and saw two men in the dark facing each other fighting. He couldn't make out either of their faces. One turned and walked back toward the dome building. The other ran west down the driveway, gone behind a hospital generator. At first, Hunaker told police and later Phil Stanford that the man walking back to the building did it leisurely, like he had nowhere to go. No stagger, no sign of pain. If he'd looked hurt, Hunaker said he would have stopped and tried to help him. But by the time Hunaker took the stand in 1991, the word had changed. Now, he stated the man had been walking briskly. But Hunaker's account did something the state never saw coming. It wrecked their own witnesses. [music] Swearington and Harden had sworn they were parked right there in front of the building and that Harden had gunned his engine and sped off the second the stabbing happened. Hunaker said there was no one else around. No headlights, no other cars, no engines running. The lot, he said, was deathly quiet. Years later, the 9inth Circuit Court of Appeals would cite exactly that. Hunaker's account of an empty parking lot as proof Swarington and Harden couldn't have been telling the truth if they'd really been there. The court found Hunaker would have seen them. What makes this tragedy even worse is that Frank Gable actually had a real alibi. He was home that night hosting a loud house party. The kind of alibi that should have been simple to prove. Instead, it would take federal public defenders decades to piece it together properly during his appeals. Gable's attorney, Bob Ael, had the tools sitting right in front of him at the trial, including Hunaker's account, the one you just heard, and he never used any of it. And maybe that's because Abel had other things on his mind. Abel was reported to be consuming a quart of vodka each night during the proceedings. The defense team was so concerned about his fitness and complete lack of preparation that they signed a letter to the presiding judge begging to postpone the trial. But for some reason, the judge ignored it. To make matters worse, Gable desperately wanted to take the stand to testify in his own defense, but he was never given the chance. On the final day of the defense's case, lead investigator Tom McCllum had to drive a forensic expert to the Portland airport. The moment Macllum hit the highway, Bob Ael abruptly arrested the defense's case without warning. Macllum called the office in absolute shock, only to find out Abel had folded the case, robbing Frank of his voice. Frank Gable was convicted in 1991 and sentenced to life without parole. They even asked for the death penalty, a mere two votes away from executing an innocent man based on a case they'd completely manufactured. [music] From his cell, Frank Gable wrote letters to journalist Phil Stanford, to strangers, to anyone who'd listened. He described how violent the place was, how much he hated it. He got sober behind bars. When strangers started sending him Christmas cards, he wrote every one of them back. a rare kindness for a man who'd spent decades learning not to trust anyone. By 2011, at 52 years old, he was still telling investigators the same thing they'd been asking him over 20 years. He hadn't done it. He never once changed his answer. For nearly three decades, Gable worked his way through the appeals process. The witnesses recanted. Investigators who looked at the case came away convinced the wrong man was in prison. And still the system held. Finally, in 2019, US Magistrate Judge John Aosta issued a ruling that stated plainly that no reasonable juror would have convicted Frank Gable given the witness recantations and the exclusion of other viable suspects. Gable walked out of prison in June 2019, but it wasn't over. Oregon appealed and he spent four more years under federal supervision facing the threat of a retrial. In May 2023, the case was finally dismissed and his record was expuned. He'd spent nearly 30 years in a prison cell and another four under federal supervision for a murder the state of Oregon ultimately walked away from. To this day, the assassination of Mike Frankie officially remains unsolved. To understand why this investigation went the way it did, you have to understand the political climate in Oregon back in 1989. Neil Goldmid was at the time one of the most powerful figures in Oregon politics. He was a former mayor of Portland, a former US Secretary of Transportation, and the sitting governor of Oregon. He was the man who'd appointed Michael Frankie to his position and was considered a rising national star. Some said maybe even presidential material. Goldmid had every reason to want the Frankie murder solved. A killing tied to corruption inside his own corrections department was a political disaster for a governor with national ambitions. Yet multiple sources say his office pushed back against any serious probe into DOC corruption. The very kind of investigation Frankie was about to set in motion. While this push back never really made sense to a lot of people. That is until 2004. That year, the publication WMT Week revealed that while Goldmid was mayor of Portland in the 1970s, he'd begun a predatory relationship with a 13-year-old girl, his family's babysitter. Her identity wouldn't become public until years later after her death. Her name was Elizabeth Dunham. The revelation shattered his reputation entirely, but investigators who'd spent years looking at the Frankie case came to a darker conclusion. The secret had been known before 2004. The theory, advanced by those who studied the case most closely, is that people Frankie was investigating in the Oregon DOC, along with the very state police tasked with investigating Frankie's murder, may have known about Goldmid's history with Dunham. They possibly used that knowledge as leverage and potentially counted on the governor's silence as insurance. [music] And these connections were very close. Goldmid's personal driver and security guard was a state police officer named Bernie Zust. Zustto was actively having an affair with the governor's wife, Margie Goldmid. And during the exact same months that the Michael Frankie murder investigation was unfolding, Gustau learned from her that Goldmitt was quietly negotiating cash payments to keep his underage victims silent. The state police didn't just suspect the governor's secret. Their own officer had reason to know it. Assigned to the governor's house by some accounts for exactly that purpose. What has been established officially is this. Frank Gable is innocent. The case is unsolved and the people who killed Michael Frankie and the people who may have ordered it have never been held accountable. In April 2025, Oregon lawmakers formally requested a new impartial federal investigation into the case. That same month, the Oregon Department of Justice offered Gable $2 million to settle his wrongful conviction lawsuit. Apparently, $2 million is what 30 years of someone's life is worth when the state can't explain how it got the verdict so wrong. Here's what we know for certain. Michael Frankie was preparing to expose something. He had a warehouse on his whiteboard. He had evidence in its briefcase. He had weapons by his bed because he believed what he found was dangerous enough to justify it. And apparently he was right. In some part of himself on some level he probably couldn't fully articulate to the people around him. He understood that what he'd uncovered was the kind of thing people don't survive. He loaded his guns. He practiced. He kept going anyway. And on a January evening in Salem, Oregon, walking 30 ft from a building to his car, he was killed for it. The night he died, someone was in the dome building who shouldn't have been there. A witness reported him. A sketch was drawn and the sketch was buried. The man who confessed with details no outsider should have known walked away with immunity attached to a code of silence. The man who may have matched the description of the figure at the scene died two weeks later. The computer printouts were shredded the Saturday after and a methamphetamine dealer with no physical connection to the crime spent nearly 30 years in a prison cell and another four under federal supervision. In the 1980s, Salem, Oregon operated like a system built to withstand scrutiny. It had survived scandal before, and this time it seemed to know the playbook. absorb the murder, steer the investigation, pressure witnesses, bury a sketch, shred evidence, and pin the case on someone it could afford to lose. The machine didn't panic. It adjusted, and that's what made it dangerous. Michael Frankie was the first person in a position of real authority who seemed genuinely willing to blow the whole thing open. [music] The North Portico where Michael Frankie died steps from where his car was parked that night. That distance, 20 maybe 30 feet, is where this story lives in the gap between what a man knew and what he never got to say. Nobody has ever answered for what happened there.